JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
Obama administration
comments on whether a $400
million cash transfer
to Iran was made in exchange for
the release
of four captive Americans.
JOHN KIRBY, U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State:
Never once in any of those
discussions was
there any discussion about
ransom.
This was always about getting
our citizens
home.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the Olympics
wind down,
the stellar moments of the Games
are overshadowed
by the fabrications of a gold
medal swimmer
from the United States.
We get a wrap-up from Rio.
Then: an on-the-ground look at
the mounting
human toll in war-torn South
Sudan, especially
among the most vulnerable, the
children.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and Jennifer Rubin
are here to
analyze a week of shakeups at
the Trump campaign
and other political news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, in the
presidential
campaign, a major resignation on
Donald Trump's
team, new details about Hillary
Clinton's
e-mails, and a visit to the
flood zone in
Louisiana.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: For Donald
Trump, a three-fold
shift, first, optics.
Today, no podium or stage, but
the candidate
on the ground, surveying
flood-ravaged Baton
Rouge.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
They need a lot of help.
What's happened here is
incredible.
Nobody understands how bad it
is.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was in part
pushback against
a vacationing President Obama,
who has taken
heat for not visiting.
Instead, he sent Homeland
Security Secretary
Jeh Johnson.
JEH JOHNSON, U.S. Secretary of
Homeland Security:
The federal government is here.
We have been here.
We will bee here as long as it
takes to help
this community recover.
LISA DESJARDINS: Louisiana's
Democratic Governor,
John Bel Edwards, would prefer
politicians
like Mr. Obama stay away for
now.
GOV.
JOHN BEL EDWARDS (D), Louisiana:
They free
up the interstate for them.
We have to take hundreds of
local first-responders,
police officers, sheriff's
deputies and state
troopers to provide security for
that type
of visit.
LISA DESJARDINS: This afternoon,
the White
House acknowledged the
governor's concerns
and said the president will
visit the area
Tuesday.
Something else new, a shift in
Trump's tone
last night in Charlotte, North
Carolina:
DONALD TRUMP: Sometimes, in the
heat of the,
debate and speaking on a
multitude of issues,
you don't choose the right words
or you say
the wrong thing.
I have done that.
(LAUGHTER)
DONALD TRUMP: And I do regret
it, particularly
where it may have caused
personal pain.
LISA DESJARDINS: He didn't say
which words
he regretted.
In a third change, today, Trump
put out his
first ad buy of the election.
NARRATOR: In Hillary Clinton's
America, the
system stays rigged against
Americans.
LISA DESJARDINS: The spot will
run in four
key states.
Hillary Clinton's ads have been
on the air
for two months.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Today, we face a choice about
who we are as
a nation.
DONALD TRUMP: I would like to
punch him in
the face, I will tell you.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Do we
help each other?
DONALD TRUMP: Knock the crap out
of him, would
you?
LISA DESJARDINS: For Trump,
changes on the
trail come, no coincidence,
amidst major changes
in staff.
Campaign chairman Paul Manafort
today became
the second Trump campaign chief
to leave in
two months, this amidst lagging
polls and
new questions about Manafort's
work for a
pro-Russia political party in
Ukraine.
As for Hillary Clinton, she was
off the campaign
trail today, but still made
headlines over
her use of private e-mail as
secretary of
state.
The New York Times reported that
Clinton told
the FBI that her predecessor,
Colin Powell,
encouraged her to use a private
e-mail account
for unclassified work.
Powell confirmed writing Clinton
about the
benefits of private e-mail for
unclassified
material.
But, unlike Clinton, Powell
didn't use a private
server.
Meanwhile, Clinton's V.P. pick,
Senator Tim
Kaine, is on a Western
fund-raising swing,
yesterday, in usual Republican
states Idaho
and Wyoming.
Today, it was Oregon and
Washington, this
weekend, California.
With two-and-a-half months to
go, it's a race
for money and votes.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
DONALD TRUMP: Good luck,
everybody.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: The
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
is warning pregnant women to
avoid traveling
to Miami Beach, Florida, on
account of the
Zika virus.
Officials say mosquitoes in the
popular tourist
destination transmitted the
virus to at least
five people.
That area is just minutes from
the state's
initial infection zone.
Governor Rick Scott said that
Florida will
remain vigilant in the face of
the new outbreak.
GOV.
RICK SCOTT (R), Florida: We know
from our
experience successfully dealing
with other
mosquito-borne viruses in our
state that,
through constant surveillance
and immediate
action, that we will protect our
families
and visitors.
We will continue the same
approach with the
Zika virus in our state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The CDC also
suggested pregnant
women and their partners --
quote -- "consider
delaying travel to all of
Miami-Dade County."
Florida now has 36
non-travel-related Zika
infections.
It was yet another day of
cleanup and recovery
following those deadly floods in
Southern
Louisiana.
Some 86,500 people have now
filed for federal
assistance after more than
two-and-a-half
feet of water soaked parts of
the state.
Meanwhile, most schools in the
Baton Rouge
area are preparing to reopen in
the coming
days.
Firefighters in Southern
California have made
major progress in battling the
massive wildfire
burning east of Los Angeles.
The fire, which first erupted
Tuesday, is
now about 26 percent contained.
That's up from just 4 percent
yesterday.
Still, the fire spans nearly 58
square miles.
Early estimates say that 96
homes have already
been destroyed.
Some 82,000 residents remain
under evacuation
orders.
Violence surged for another day
in Syria,
as the bloody battle for Aleppo
once again
put civilians in the crosshairs.
The fighting showed no signs of
abating, in
spite of international calls for
a brief cease-fire
to allow desperately needed
humanitarian aid
to reach residents.
Diana Magnay of Independent
Television News
narrates our report.
DIANA MAGNAY: The rebels have
broken the government
siege on rebel-held areas in the
east, opening
up one tenuous access route in
the city's
south.
Some supplies have made it
through, but they
are vulnerable to attack.
Government forces are fighting
to retake rebel
positions beyond this main road,
but they're
being forced to retreat back
into the city,
or into what's left of it.
And they're vulnerable, too,
taking shelter
behind a wall where they think
they can't
be seen, unaware of the rebel
missile headed
directly for them.
Russia today launched long-range
cruise missiles
from warships in the Eastern
Mediterranean
aimed, they say, at targets in
Syria belonging
to Fateh al-Sham, formerly known
as al-Nusra.
They say they have nothing to do
with the
bombs which each day destroy
more and more
of Aleppo, that Russia would
never strike
targets in populated areas.
But civilian targets are being
hit as a matter
of course across Syria.
Last night in Darayya, a suburb
of Damascus,
a field hospital was destroyed
by what the
Free Syrian Army says were
barrel bombs filled
with napalm, and just north of
Homs, seven
more killed today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fierce battles
are also under
way in Syria's Northeast, where
Kurdish forces
are fighting the Syrian army for
control of
Hasakah.
Syrian government warplanes have
bombed that
city for two straight days.
Yesterday, the U.S.-led
coalition had to scramble
aircraft to protect American
special operations
ground forces who are supporting
the Kurds
there.
Today, the Pentagon warned Syria
would be
-- quote -- "well-advised" not
to hit U.S.
and allied personnel inside the
country."
Russian President Vladimir Putin
touched down
in Crimea today, amid renewed
tensions between
his government and Ukraine.
It's been two years since Russia
annexed the
peninsula from Ukraine.
Putin's visit came a week after
he accused
he called Ukrainian saboteurs of
attacking
Russian troops in Crimea.
Kiev denies the claim, and says
it's a pretext
for a new Russian invasion.
But, today, Putin met with his
Security Council
and he doubled down on the
charges.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): It looks like our
partners in
Kiev made a decision to escalate
the situation
and it's clear why they are
doing it, because
they don't want or can't, for
some reason,
comply with cease-fire accords,
as well as
can't explain their failures in
social and
economic policy to their own
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
Russian military
forces are building up their
presence along
Russia's western border within
striking distance
of Ukraine.
I will talk to State Department
spokesman
John Kirby about this right
after the news
summary.
Stocks fell on Wall Street
today, led by declines
in utility shares.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 45 points
to close at 18552.
The Nasdaq fell nearly two
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped three.
For the week, both the Dow and
the S&P 500
lost a fraction of a percent.
The Nasdaq rose a fraction of a
percent, notching
its first eight-week winning
streak since
2010.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the latest
on the Olympics, the medal
count, and the
swimmers scandal; how
reintegrating former
child soldiers is impacting
civilians in South
Sudan; and much more.
The January release of American
prisoners
from Iran was accompanied by a
$400 million
payment, money the Islamic
Republic had been
owed for decades from a weapons
sale that
was never completed between the
United States
and Iran because of the
revolution there.
The Obama administration
announced the payment
at the time.
But, lately, critics have
alleged that the
payment's proximity to the
release amounted
to a ransom, a charge the
administration denies.
But, yesterday, the State
Department modified
its response, saying the
millions of dollars
were used as -- quote --
"leverage" amid the
negotiations over the prisoners.
Earlier today, I spoke with the
State Department's
top spokesman, Admiral John
Kirby.
Admiral John Kirby, welcome.
You have said that the cash
payment that went
to the Iranian government was
intended as
leverage to gain the release of
these American
prisoners.
How is that different from
paying ransom?
JOHN KIRBY, U.S. Assistant
Secretary of State:
Well, I didn't say that it was
used -- that
it was a leverage payment.
Remember, this was Iranian money
that they
had coming to them through The
Hague tribunal,
and it was money that had been
frozen way
back in 1979.
So it was their money and they
were going
to get it anyway.
These parallel tracks were
moving forward,
and they began to converge.
In fact, we took advantage of
the convergence
in a short 24-hour period to
kind of wrap
it all up together.
Now, what I said is, though,
while there is
no connection between the $400
million and
the return of our American
citizens, we did,
however, in those endgame hours,
hold back
that payment until we knew that
our Americans
were safe and sound and on their
way out of
Iran, because, in the very last
few hours,
Iran was playing a few games
here on us.
And we weren't quite sure that
the release
was going to happen.
And we were worried about Iran
reneging on
that very lengthy negotiation
process that
we put in place to bring them
home.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that there are
more Americans still being held
in Iran, and
we know that the U.S. still owes
Iran over
a billion dollars in payments.
Could that money be used to help
gain the
release of these additional
Americans?
JOHN KIRBY: Well, again, we
don't pay ransom,
Judy, and this wasn't ransom.
It's a policy.
The United States doesn't pay
ransom.
The $1.3 billion that you're
referring to,
which was the interest payment
scheduled based
on the $400 million frozen
assets, that has
already been taken care of
through the judgment
fund.
So that money has been paid out
to Iran through
a separate process.
But, in any event, regardless,
we don't pay
ransom.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn to
Syria.
There have been horrific images
coming out
of there in the last few days,
especially
from Aleppo.
We know that Secretary Kerry has
been working
on some sort of military
cooperation, coordination
between the U.S. and Russia.
How would that work?
JOHN KIRBY: Well, there's a
couple of things
here going on.
Right?
I mean, there is obviously a
coalition effort
against Da'esh inside of Syria,
which does
have military components.
And then there is a very strong
and strident
effort diplomatically to come to
a political
solution inside Syria.
And right now, because the
cessation of hostilities
hasn't been uniformly observed
and the regime
keeps violating it, and Russian
military activity
keeps supporting those
violations in some
regards, but we have teams,
Russian and U.S.
teams, that are working through
a series of
proposals that were agreed to a
couple of
weeks ago in Moscow by the
secretary and Foreign
Minister Lavrov to get the
cessation of hostilities
enforceable nationwide and in an
enduring
way.
We hope that they will be
successful.
But as the secretary said
himself, this isn't
about trust and it isn't about
blind faith.
This will only work if Russia is
willing and
able to use the influence that
we know they
have on the Assad regime to get
these bombings
to stop, to reduce the violence,
to create
not only a safer environment for
the Syrian
people, but he still believes
that, if we
can create some breathing space,
if we can
create a reduction in violence,
that he can
get the opposition and the
regime back to
the table perhaps as early as
the end of this
month.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you say,
that is a
big if.
But even if it did work,
wouldn't it mean
that President Assad would
remain in power,
as the Russians now currently
say they want
him to do?
And doesn't that contradict what
the U.S.
goal is, which is to remove him?
JOHN KIRBY: Well, I would say a
couple of
things there.
First of all, the Russians have
had a long
relationship with and in Syria
for decades
now, and we have seen in the
past where their
Russian -- their activity, their
military
activity has bolstered the
regime in very
unhelpful ways, obviously.
But I will also say this.
The Russians are a co-founder of
the International
Syria Support Group.
The Russians signed on to the
U.N. Security
Council resolution which
codified that process
and codified the movement
towards a cessation
of hostilities and humanitarian
access.
The Russians themselves have
said in paper,
in writing that they, like the
rest of the
international community, want to
seek a Syria
that is whole, and unified, and
pluralistic,
safe and secure.
Now, as part of all that, they
have also agreed
to a transitional process in
Syria to get
to a government that is decided
upon by the
Syrian people, and that's what
we're all working
towards.
Now, we have said our policy is
that we don't
believe Bashar al-Assad, because
of his brutality,
can be a part of the long-term
future of Syria.
We still believe that.
That is still the case.
Our view is, Assad cannot be at
the head of
such a government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Admiral Kirby,
one other quick
subject, Ukraine.
We know that the Russians have
been beefing
up their military presence along
the border.
We know that President Putin is
in Crimea
today, which Russia invaded two
years ago.
What does the U.S. think
President Putin is
up to, and what is the U.S.
prepared to do
if the Russians do go into
Ukraine?
JOHN KIRBY: Obviously, increased
military
activity along the border is not
going to
be helpful to creating a secure
future here
and to getting us past the
tensions and towards
a full implementation of Minsk.
Now, the Russians have committed
to Minsk
implementation.
We obviously want to see all
sides contribute
to that in a meaningful way.
That means pulling back the
weapons.
It means pulling back the
forces.
It means allowing for monitors
to go in and
allowing for local elections.
And we aren't there yet.
And the secretary routinely
discusses this
with Foreign Minister Lavrov.
That's the outcome that we want
to see.
On Crimea, we do not recognize
the occupation
of Crimea.
Crimea is part of Ukraine.
And we have said long ago you
can't redraw
the borders of the map of Europe
through the
barrel of a gun, as was done in
Crimea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Admiral John
Kirby at the State
Department, we thank you.
JOHN KIRBY: My pleasure.
Thanks for having me, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After our
interview, spokesman
Kirby made one more point about
Russian military
activity on the border of
Ukraine.
He said, while the U.S. doesn't
have perfect
visibility, it also doesn't have
indications
right now that they, the
Russians, are prepared
to go across the line.
right now that they, the
Russians, are prepared
to go across the line.
Now to Brazil and the Olympics,
where the
Games are heading into the final
weekend on
and off the fields of play.
Jeffrey Brown has our update.
JEFFREY BROWN: Decorated
American Olympic
swimmer Ryan Lochte apologized
today for his
behavior last weekend after
videotapes and
statements from other American
swimmers contradicted
Lochte's account of a supposed
robbery at
a Rio gas station.
Meanwhile, on the track,
Jamaican sprinter
Usain Bolt showed he's still the
fastest man
on Earth, adding another
200-meter win to
his 100 meters earlier this
week.
He goes for a ninth career gold
medal today.
And back with us from Rio,
Christine Brennan,
covering the Games for USA Today
and as a
contributor for CNN, and NPR's
Lulu Garcia-Navarro.
And welcome back to both of you.
Christine, let's start with you
and Ryan Lochte.
He apologized without quite
admitting that
he had lied about what happened.
Do we know, at this point, what
happened?
CHRISTINE BRENNAN, USA Today: I
don't know,
Jeff, that we're ever going to
know exactly
what happened at that gas
station in the early
hours of Sunday morning.
And I'm not so sure at this
point if we need
to.
I mean, obviously, that will all
be sorted
out as best as the lawyers and
everyone can
do.
The bottom line is, it's a story
that basically
just took over these Olympics
and took coverage
away from athletes who deserved
it, all because
these four Americans were out on
a night on
the town, apparently drunk,
allegedly vandalizing
a gas station, and then,
obviously, this cover-up.
And everyone, I think, is well
aware of the
story.
But it just was a complete lack
of where they
should be and what they should
do.
You're a representative of the
United States.
I know our senses are so dulled
by pro athletes,
Jeff, that kind of say, well,
they're always
going to misbehave.
Well, the U.S. Olympic Committee
is very serious
about this.
USA Swimming is very serious
The notion that these guys
created an international
incident, and Ryan Lochte even
spoke about
it, he should have just kept
quiet.
This is going to haunt him for
the rest of
his life.
And I think it will be -- this
is what Olympics
-- the swimming will be
remembered, sadly,
not as much as Michael Phelps
and Katie Ledecky
in the first week.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, and, Lulu,
he is now
possibly facing a suspension.
But, in Brazil, the Brazilians
haven't taken
this well at all, correct?
Tell us about the reaction.
Tell us how it's played there.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO, National
Public Radio:
Well, as you can imagine, I
think it's been
treated with a great deal of
fury and outrage
and disgust.
His actions are being seen as a
symbol of
the ugly American, and basically
people here
feel that the actions of the
four Americans
reflected very badly on the
United States,
reflected very badly on their
Olympics.
They feel very aggrieved,
because all the
focused was on Ryan Lochte
having said that
he had been assaulted.
And it made these Olympics look
very bad.
And now they feel that he lied,
he misrepresented
what happened and that an
apology, quite simply,
is not quite enough.
And the apology that he gave is
being received
here as not really an apology.
They don't feel that he admitted
what they
feel is the truth, which is that
he lied.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lulu, is there
still any potential
legal or diplomatic implications
to come?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Well, I
think the diplomatic
implications are that -- have
sort of been
resolved.
Certainly, three of the swimmers
are on their
way back to the States.
And we understand that the other
will be leaving
shortly.
And so, therefore, I think it
has been smoothed
over.
The police do feel that they did
their job.
They investigated this.
They showed to the world that,
in fact, what
Ryan Lochte and his cohorts said
had happened
had not happened.
And so I think the Brazilian
government, Rio's
government and the police feel
that they have
shown that they are responsible
and that this
is a place that has the rule of
law.
So, I don't think it will go any
further diplomatically.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so,
Christine, back
to sports now.
Last week, you and I talked
about swimmers
in a different context, swimmers
in the pool,
and about gymnastics.
And this time, I think we want
to talk about
one guy, this great runner,
Usain Bolt.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Oh,
absolutely, Jeff.
And for all the terrible things
that the Americans
did -- and they will get
suspended for it
almost for sure -- then you have
got the joy
of Usain Bolt, and winning the
100-meter for
the third time.
No man has ever done that
before, Beijing,
London and now Rio.
He had to come from behind.
Justin Gatlin had the lead with
about 75 meters
to go.
No problem.
But Usain Bolt could not dance
and prance
and look around at the end.
He had to pretty much run
through the tape,
the finish line.
And then coming back in the 200
meters, this
is a difficult double under any
circumstances.
Usain Bolt turned 30 on Sunday,
the day these
Games end.
And he's not a young man in this
sport.
And, as we know, he had a
hamstring injury,
and there's been a lot of
questions.
So, he's now done the 100, the
200, huge win,
and if he gets the relay, the
Jamaican relay,
he will have an incredible
triple-triple,
three events, three different
Olympic Games,
and winning in them all.
He has cemented himself as one
of the greatest
Olympians of all time.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, briefly,
Christine, because
we have also seen the continued
dominance
of American women, including in
the medal
count.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Absolutely.
Team Title IX, we saw it start
in London,
Jeff.
We talked about it then.
We're talking about it again
now, Title IX,
signed by Richard Nixon in June
of '72, working
it way through the generations,
creating of
all these great athletes, the
girl next door
who grows up and wins the
Olympic U.S. medals.
U.S. women are dominating,
winning about 60,
61, 62 percent of the U.S. gold
medals and
also well over 50 percent of the
U.S. total
medals.
And get used to it.
It's going to keep happening
over and over
again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, Lulu, I
want to come
back to you, because we -- you
and I talked
several days before the Games
started about
all the apprehension, lack of
preparation,
Brazil's economic problems.
You even said to me, I remember,
at that point
that locals were ready to have
it done with,
even before it had started.
So, what's your sense now of how
people have
responded?
How has it gone over there?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: I think you
can look
at this in two ways.
Certainly, when you speak to
average Brazilians,
they have fallen in love with
the Olympics.
They have really greeted it with
a great deal
of joy, once the opening
ceremony happened.
They really enjoyed seeing all
the people
here, and they enjoyed having
the athletes
compete.
But, on the other hand, of
course, there have
been a number of problems,
leaving Ryan Lochte
aside, the fact that he might
have invented
what happened to him, but there
have been
assaults, there have been
organizational snafus,
empty seats, slow ticket sales.
So I think the epitaph for these
Olympics
is going to be mixed.
I think people will look at this
on the one
hand and say the Brazilians did
the best that
they could under very difficult
circumstances,
but, on the other hand, this
wasn't an Olympics
that a lot of people think was
up to standard.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, briefly,
still to come,
there are some problems, Lulu,
with the Paralympics.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Well, this
actually is
a growing controversy, a great
scandal.
Basically, the Paralympic Games,
which did
so well in the last Summer
Olympic Games in
London, are now facing
unprecedented -- an
unprecedented budget crisis.
Basically, we have been told
today that maybe
10 teams at least won't be able
to make it
here because Rio 2016 Organizing
Committee
doesn't have the money to pay
for them to
come.
They're going to be slashing
venues.
transportation.
And so what the head, the
president of the
Paralympics Committee said today
was that,
in his 50-plus years of being
involved in
this movement, he had never
faced a situation
like this.
It is an absolute scandal, he
said.
And he's very concerned about
how these Paralympic
Games will go off.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Lulu
Garcia-Navarro,
Christine Brennan, thank you
both very much
from Rio.
CHRISTINE BRENNAN: Thank you,
Jeff.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: You're
welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
master filmmaker
on his work and new documentary;
and Mark
Shields and Jennifer Rubin.
But, first: The world's newest
country, South
Sudan, established in 2011,
again stands on
the brink of civil war.
A peace deal signed last year
between rival
governing factions is in
tatters.
More than one-sixth of the
country's 12 million
citizens have been displaced,
and the humanitarian
crisis there is worsening by the
day.
John Yang has the story.
JOHN YANG: For that view, we
turn to photographer
Sebastian Rich, who has covered
conflict zones
for more than four decades.
He has been to South Sudan many
times.
He is there now on assignment
for UNICEF,
the United Nations children's
agency.
He joins us now via Skype from
Juba, the capital.
Sebastian, thanks for joining
thus evening.
First of all, tell us how it
feels now, what
the situation is like on the
ground now.
SEBASTIAN RICH, Photojournalist:
Well, the
situation is a little more tense
than it was,
obviously, before the recent
fighting.
The recent fighting has put the
people, the
ordinary people in the street.
They're much more tense than
they were.
There's not so many friendly
faces.
If you walk in the streets of
Juba now, you're
not greeted the same way you
were a couple
of months ago or even a year
ago, when I came
last year.
JOHN YANG: And how is this
affecting the children
that you're covering, that
you're there watching,
looking at behalf on UNICEF,
particularly
the issues of malnutrition?
SEBASTIAN RICH: Well, it's
affecting the children
very badly.
And there's 250,000, a
quarter-of-a-million
children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition.
And that's not including the
children who
just got malnutrition, the first
stages of.
So, what's happened is that the
children who
were actually starting to
recover from severe
acute malnutrition before this
recent fighting,
when the fighting happened,
those children
couldn't come back to the
hospitals to get
their follow-up treatment and
children that
had started to get malnutrition
couldn't get
to the hospitals either.
So now we have this huge
increase in malnutrition
and severe cases of
malnutrition.
And UNICEF is trying its very,
very best to
keep on top of this disaster.
JOHN YANG: And you spent time
some today,
you were telling me, with a
young girl who
actually has been making
progress.
And is there danger that this
could reverse
what's happening?
SEBASTIAN RICH: Yes.
It's not all bad news.
There are wonderful individual
cases.
Last year, I photographed a
little in a hospital
in Juba.
And she was on death's door.
She was a tiny little stick
insect.
And I stayed with her for a
couple of weeks.
And she got a bit better and bit
better.
And, today, six months later,
when I came
back, I photographed her and
filmed her with
her family, singing and dancing
to tunes on
my iPhone.
And it was fantastic to see a
success story
for once in this mess here.
JOHN YANG: And is there danger
that, with
this increased tension, that
some of that
progress could be reversed or
lost?
SEBASTIAN RICH: Yes, of course.
Children will die.
I mean, I don't see how you can
sugarcoat
it.
If you don't get treated for
severe acute
malnutrition, you will die.
It's not only malnutrition.
There's complications with
malnutrition.
A lot of these children have on
top of that
tuberculosis and malaria.
So, yes, put it very simply,
they will die.
JOHN YANG: And another area that
this sort
of increased tension threatens
are child soldiers.
We have seen reports that,
perhaps in preparation
for tensions, that the
recruitment of child
soldiers is on the increase
again.
You have actually been watching
programs where
they have been trying to take
them out of
those -- of that situation.
SEBASTIAN RICH: Yes.
Well, once again, the renewed
fighting has
caused more problems, because
now much more
children will be coerced into
trying to be
forced into joining armed
groups.
But UNICEF, once again, has been
very, very
successful in taking these
children who have
recently been released from
armed groups and
getting them back into
education, and some
of them for the very, very first
times in
their lives.
And this is a great success.
And it's going to be a great
shame not to
see this success actually, you
know, flower
into something very good.
JOHN YANG: You talk about these
former child
soldiers going into school
again.
UNICEF says that half of
children in South
Sudan don't go to school, which
is the highest
proportion, they say, in the
world.
What's it like for a child?
What's a child's life like in
Juba in South
Sudan?
SEBASTIAN RICH: Well, all over
-- yes, you're
quite right.
South Sudan, there's more
children now out
of school than any other country
on the planet.
And what you have to remember,
that the war
here and the ongoing wars and
troubles here
have just basically stripped
most infrastructure.
And so school, they don't have
desks.
They don't have anything to sit
on.
I photographed yesterday
children sitting
on metal car wheels with no tire
on it to
listen to their teacher, sitting
on engine
parts, sitting on buckets,
sitting on little
stoves that they take to school.
And when they bring the stoves
home, their
mother takes the stoves and
cooks them lunch
on it.
It's more, more than basic,
actually.
And these are dirt floors as
well.
JOHN YANG: Sebastian Rich,
thanks so much
for not only your insights on
what's going
on, on the ground in South
Sudan, but also
for your powerful images of what
is going
on.
SEBASTIAN RICH: My pleasure.
Thank you very much, indeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: The promise
and peril
of the Internet is the subject
of Werner Herzog's
new documentary out today.
The legendary filmmaker was
recently honored
with an achievement award from
the American
Film Institute for his work in
documentary
film.
In Washington, Jeffrey Brown
caught up with
Herzog to discuss the new film
and more.
WERNER HERZOG, Documentary
Filmmaker: This
is the birthplace of the
Internet.
JEFFREY BROWN: In his new
documentary, "Lo
and Behold: Reveries of the
Connected World,"
filmmaker Werner Herzog is again
asking big
questions.
WERNER HERZOG: An explosion of
information
technology on the Internet has
led to some
of its greatest glories.
JEFFREY BROWN: This time about
the Internet.
WOMAN: The Internet is a
manifestation of
evil itself.
JEFFREY BROWN: Its history, its
impact, good
and bad, on all of us.
MAN: That is the goal, to have a
team of soccer
playing robots defeat the FIFA
world champion.
WERNER HERZOG: I try to be after
something
that is deeply reverberating
inside of our
souls, some deep echo from --
even from prehistory.
What makes us humans?
How do we communicate?
Where are we going at this
moment?
Something for an audience where
they can step
outside of themselves, where
they can be almost
like in ecstasy of truth, some
sort of deep
illumination.
And that's what I'm trying in
documentaries
and in feature films.
JEFFREY BROWN: That search
played out in early
dramas, such as "Aguirre, the
Wrath of God"
in 1972, about a mad
conquistador seeking
gold in Peru, and, 10 years
later, "Fitzcarraldo,"
the story of a man obsessed with
bring opera
to the Amazon jungle.
That film would become famous
for what happened
behind the scenes, as Herzog
insisted on having
his actors and crew actually
drag a large
boat over land, rather than
using special
effects.
Herzog's quest for ecstatic
truth also came
through in documentaries, such
as "Grizzly
Man" in 2005, telling of a man
who lived among
bears in Alaska before being
killed by them.
MAN: Occasionally, I am
challenged.
And in that case, the kind
warrior must, must,
must become a samurai.
WERNER HERZOG: This cave had
been perfectly
sealed for tens of thousand of
years.
JEFFREY BROWN: And in 2010's the
"Cave of
Forgotten Dreams," which
explored prehistoric
cave paintings in Southern
France.
WERNER HERZOG: These images are
memories of
long-forgotten dreams.
JEFFREY BROWN: Some 70 films to
date, a remarkable
career, one he's insisted on
building his
own way, despite setbacks.
In a series of interviews you
did over the
years, it's in a book called "A
Guide for
the Perplexed," you speak of the
-- quote
-- "cumulative humiliations and
defeats" that
you have experienced.
And I wonder...
WERNER HERZOG: Yes.
Who has not?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, who has
not, but what
did you learn from them, how
important are
those?
WERNER HERZOG: You see, I'm
completely self-taught.
I never went to film school.
I was never assistant anywhere.
So, of course, I learned by
trial and error.
My first featurettes were my
film school.
And, of course, until today,
none one of my
first films has ever been sold,
but it's OK,
money lost, but film gained.
And there was a some sort of a
dialectic of
defeat.
Somehow, it converts into
something that pushed
me forward.
Yes, I have learned a lot
through defeats,
and, until today, it's -- I'm
still haunted
by defeats, and they do happen.
Sometimes, a film of mine is
rejected.
And how do you deal with it?
And you have to learn how to
deal with it
and survive anyway.
MAN: It consists of modems, CPU,
logic units.
JEFFREY BROWN: His new film, "Lo
and Behold,"
is divided into 10 chapters, and
features
interviews with early Internet
pioneers.
MAN: And it was here that the
first message
was sent.
A revolution began.
JEFFREY BROWN: Robotics
engineers pushing
the boundaries of artificial
intelligence.
MAN: It's one of my favorites,
actually.
WERNER HERZOG: Beautiful.
Do you love it?
MAN: Yes, we do.
JEFFREY BROWN: And leading
thinkers about
what may come, including life on
Mars.
MAN: I mean, right now, we can't
even get
one person to Mars.
WERNER HERZOG: I would come
along.
I wouldn't have a problem.
One-way ticket.
MAN: Sounds great.
WERNER HERZOG: I would be your
candidate.
MAN: OK.
WERNER HERZOG: Here, all of a
sudden, we have
a revolution in -- in
communication, and it
is -- it is really, truly big.
It is as big as the introduction
of fire to
the human race, or the
introduction of electricity
into our lives.
And this is very, very big.
And I see how rapidly things are
changing.
And, of course, there is a
fascination, although
I use it very little.
I do use the Internet for
e-mails, and sometimes
for Google Maps, and that's
basically it.
JEFFREY BROWN: That's it?
WERNER HERZOG: And I don't use a
cell phone.
JEFFREY BROWN: You do not?
Why?
WERNER HERZOG: No, I do not want
one.
I do not want it for cultural
reasons.
I do not want to be available
all the time.
I want to have time to think and
to touch
somebody, and have a meal across
my kitchen
table without a cell phone,
being constantly
on tweets.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, at the
end of "Lo
and Behold," one isn't sure
whether to be
hopeful or not, right?
There's lots of reasons that you
give us to
be very fearful, right?
If the robots don't get us, then
the sun flares
might get us.
What about you, I wonder?
Are you hopeful?
WERNER HERZOG: Well, I couldn't
say that,
because not only the Internet is
very fragile,
and if that collapses, our
civilization is
going to collapse, and there
will be billions
of people dead, because we
cannot step back
into hunting and foraging.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that leaves
you?
WERNER HERZOG: It leaves me with
the idea
we'd better anticipate what's
going on.
We take our right steps today
and now.
And we'd better avoid, that we
are overdependent
on, let's say, the Internet.
We're overdependent on other
things.
We are dangerously
overpopulated.
JEFFREY BROWN: But for however
many years
we have left, no lack of
subjects clearly
for you?
WERNER HERZOG: No, I think it's
like burglars
in the middle of the night in my
kitchen uninvited,
and they come swinging at me.
So I'd better deal with what's
the most ferociously
swinging.
And the last one really
swinging, coming at
me, was "Lo and Behold."
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Werner
Herzog, thank
you so much.
WERNER HERZOG: You are very
welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's Friday, and
so we turn
to politics, and the analysis of
Shields and
Rubin.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
Jennifer Rubin, the opinion
writer for The
Washington Post.
David Brooks is away this week.
We welcome you.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And good to have
you back,
Mark.
MARK SHIELDS: Good to be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's talk
about this upheaval
in the Trump campaign, phases
one and two.
We have a new -- Mark, a new
campaign manager.
We have Paul Manafort out after
some stories
about his work in Ukraine.
We know that one of the new
folks coming in
is from Breitbart News, Stephen
Bannon.
What do we make of all this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, first of
all, Judy, every
campaign is ultimately,
inevitably a mirror
reflection of the candidate.
The criminality and paranoia of
the Nixon
campaign began with Richard
Nixon.
The discipline and, I would say,
the insularity
of Jimmy Carter's campaign began
with Jimmy
Carter.
And I think that's true of every
campaign.
This is a year unlike any year,
when voters
are so angry with Washington.
They think Washington is awash
in money, that
money buys influence, buys
access, puts the
fix in.
So, what does -- Donald Trump,
who has an
advantage over Hillary Clinton
of 3-1 on someone
who would change Washington, he
hires the
ultimate insider, the guy who
gets, according
to reports, various reports, got
$12 million
in cash for representing the
pro-Russian,
pro-Putin interests and parties
in Ukraine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is Manafort.
MARK SHIELDS: Paul Manafort, the
ultimate
insider.
So, now Paul Manafort is gone,
amidst charges
that this is just Washington as
usual, the
worst kind.
And who does he bring in?
He brings in Stephen Bannon,
who's never run
a campaign before, who has done
a good job
of running a Web site.
It's been very successful.
And he lines himself up with
Roger Ailes,
Roger Ailes, the recently
deposed chief of
FOX News, the bete noire of
every liberal
in the country, many of whom are
sort of lukewarm
toward Hillary Clinton, and who
has just left
amidst a flurry of serious
allegations about
sexual harassment of women and
misconduct.
So, I don't know.
I mean, it just -- if personnel
is policy,
these self-inflicted wounds on
the part of
Trump are just, if not mortal,
they're seriously
damaging.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
all this, Jennifer?
JENNIFER RUBIN: Well, I think
several strands
of the campaign came together
all at once.
One is this very odd
relationship, maybe not
even relationship, that Donald
Trump has with
Vladimir Putin and the number of
advisers
around him who are overtly
pro-Russian, who
have made money in Russia.
So, that's one strand.
The next strand is, there is no
campaign.
As you were saying, there is no
one really
running the store.
There is something more to a
campaign than
the candidate showing up and
giving a speech.
There's ad buys, there's ground
game, there's
all sorts of elements.
And I see none of that.
And, apparently, Mr. Manafort
didn't do that.
Maybe he tried and Donald didn't
let him.
Maybe he didn't know how to do
that.
So, that's the second strand.
A third is, he's behind.
And the national polls, I think,
underestimate
the trouble he's in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Really?
JENNIFER RUBIN: He is trailing
in virtually
every poll in every
battleground.
And now we have new battleground
states.
They're called Georgia and
Arizona, which
is unheard of.
So, that's another strand that
kind of came
together this week.
And I think the last thing is,
how is this
new mix going to work?
Donald Trump throws people out
and he pairs
people together.
Kellyanne...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Conway, the
pollster.
JENNIFER RUBIN: ... Conway is a
very polished,
very buttoned-down pollster, not
a campaign
chief, but a pollster, matching
with this
fellow who ran not just a
right-wing Web site,
but one that really made its
money and attracted
a very anti-Semitic,
anti-minority clique
called the alt-right.
These two people are supposed to
work together
in some cohesive campaign?
I don't see it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Mark, this
is all happening.
The evidence that we're seeing
is, Donald
Trump gave a speech in North
Carolina last
night where he said -- for the
first time,
he said: I misspoke.
I didn't say what I should have
said in some
instances.
He didn't say what he was
talking about.
He said: If I have caused people
some pain,
I regret that.
Today, he was touring the
flooding in Louisiana.
Are we seeing a different Donald
Trump now?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I mean, he
certainly admitting
that somehow he may have hurt
somebody's feelings,
in sort of the contrived,
counterfeit apology,
that if I in any way offended
you by burning
down your house and killing your
dogs, then
I'm sorry.
I mean, this is a man that we
saw at the opening
called John McCain, an authentic
hero, he
said he wasn't a hero because he
had been
captured.
This is a man who accused Ted
Cruz's father
of colluding with Lee Harvey
Oswald just days
before Lee Harvey Oswald
assassinated President
Kennedy, I mean, a man who has
made just incredibly
outrageous, offensive, vulgar,
obscene charges,
and who ridiculed a respected
reporter with
a physical affliction, and over
and over again.
So, I mean, this is something
new that we're
seeing in Trump.
He's giving -- he gave a better
speech, I
think, this week than he's
given.
I mean, it was a coherent
speech.
It had echoes of Nixon '68.
And I don't mean that in a
pejorative sense.
It really did.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: But he's not as
good on the
teleprompter as he is
spontaneously.
I think the roar of grease paint
the sound
of the crowd really gets him.
And I think, if he is going to
give teleprompted
speeches, he is not going to get
that same
reaction that really gets his
adrenaline going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jennifer, some of
what the
campaign has been saying is,
this is going
to let Donald Trump be Donald
Trump.
So, is that what you see going
on here?
JENNIFER RUBIN: Well, maybe
Donald Trump is
schizophrenic, because, on one
hand, he's
reading off a teleprompter.
On the other hand, I think we
have come to
know the real Donald Trump, who
is irreverent,
who is rude, who is aggressive,
who loves
that interaction, that
spontaneity.
So I think they have to figure
out whether
he's going to be something in
between, or
one on one day and another on
the next.
And Mark raises something, I
think, that is
important.
And that is, there gets to be an
incoherence
about that campaign.
His supporters love him because
he was outrageous
and frankly said a lot of things
that they
thought were politically
incorrect, which
others might think of as racist
or misogynistic.
But the rest of the voters are
very skeptical
of him.
Does he lose both sides now, or
does he gain
supporters?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about the
other side of the campaign,
because, Mark,
Hillary Clinton is out there.
She's ahead, as we have said, in
the polls
in most of the battleground
states.
Do you see the kind of
enthusiasm for her
out there that we have been
looking for throughout
this campaign?
And then you had another
reminder this week
about the e-mail issue, that she
told the
FBI that she got the idea for
using personal
e-mail from Colin Powell.
He now says, yes, I suggested
it, but I never
suggested she use her own
server.
MARK SHIELDS: No.
Judy, this has been a campaign
of self-inflicted
wounds on both sides.
From 2000 to 2014, Hillary
Clinton was in
the United States Senate,
candidate for president
and then secretary of state.
She was mercifully and happily
divorced from
the Clinton Foundation, which
was raising
money from all sorts of sources,
many of whom
couldn't take a frisk.
There were people with an agenda
totally alien
and hostile to anything that
Hillary Clinton's
ever stood for, and some people
who were rather
shady characters.
She leaves that job as secretary
of state
and plunges into the foundation.
She goes right into it.
So, now she's afflicted with
that.
She's stayed with that.
She gives speeches for $600,000
-- six-figure
speeches and won't reveal the
text of what
she's done, again,
self-inflicted.
And you point out the e-mail
server, the private
e-mail, all self-inflicted.
So the perception of her as
somebody who plays
too close to the edge, who has
rules especially
for her, who has -- because of
her righteous
and moral impulses and beliefs
is somehow
exempt from ordinary rules and
is overly secretive,
I mean, that persists.
And it didn't come from Donald
Trump and it
didn't come from Republicans.
It came from her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Jennifer, we
did have
Bill Clinton saying yesterday
that he's going
to -- he would step down from
the foundation
if she's elected president and
that they won't
be taking any more money from
foreign sources
or corporate sources, he said.
JENNIFER RUBIN: This is the
proverbial closing
the barn door after the horse is
out and gone
and probably died, because he's
been out for
so long.
Why did they have those donors
all along,
as Marks points out?
It was influence peddle, from an
objective
eye.
People who wanted to be in close
with the
Clintons, who knew that she was
going to be
running for office, gave to her
foundation,
paid her and her husband for
speeches.
It's the typical pay-to-play
kind of game.
So, now to say, now that we have
taken all
the money and we have gotten
what we wanted,
which is to get into office, we
won't take
any more, I'm not all that
impressed.
And I don't think the American
people will
be either.
I do think, however, she is the
luckiest person
on the face of the earth,
because not very
many people are going to focus
on that part
of this week, with Donald Trump
doing his
usual chaos routine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, can she keep
going like
this, Mark, with -- you have
said self-inflicted
wounds.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, this is a
year, if it's
the fundamentals, it's a year of
change.
Voters want change, and they
don't want continuity.
She's the candidate of the
status quo.
It's a third Democratic term.
But all the focus, Donald Trump,
instead of
being the candidate of change,
is the candidate
of chaos, the candidate of
crisis, And, I
mean, just -- basically, he goes
to Louisiana
today, which was certainly good.
And what does he say when he's
there?
He says: Great place.
I have had a great history with
Louisiana.
I mean, this is a man who is in
stage four
self-centeredness.
And so he draws the spotlight to
himself,
and it helps her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Jennifer?
I mean, I was going to ask both
of you.
Donald Trump is there with Mike
Pence, his
running mate.
President Obama hasn't been
there yet.
He's still on vacation.
Hillary Clinton put in a call to
Louisiana's
governor.
Is this the kind of thing that
politicians
should be jumping to go do right
now at this
point or staying away from?
JENNIFER RUBIN: This is the
dilemma, of course,
that George W. Bush faced with
Katrina.
He kind of played it halfway and
got vilified
because there was a shot of him
looking down
at New Orleans from the sky.
I think the president is right
to stay away
for a few days.
He's going to go on Tuesday.
I think it is an incredible
strain on the
first-responders, on security
folks, on all
the people who should be
spending 110 percent
of their time on helping the
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is what the
governor
said.
JENNIFER RUBIN: Exactly.
And for a candidate who has no
ability to
do anything about it -- you can
understand
a president who wants to see
things, wants
to assess how bad things are,
wants to get
a feel for things.
But these people are just there
to have their
picture taken.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I thought the
president should
have -- somewhere between his
312th and 313th
round of golf, should have put
on a suit and
tie and spoken to the press.
The president is not only the
commander in
chief.
He's the consoler-in-chief.
And I think just -- just to
tell, express
the sympathy, support and what
we were doing
as a people, by television, to
the people
of Louisiana, not to go down.
I think Jennifer is absolutely
right, not
to interfere with that or upset
things down
there.
But I just -- I think that's
something that
a president has to do and should
do at that
time.
And I think the president, he
doesn't like
to be forced into these things.
And I think he resisted it.
And I think now he looks like
he's going down
in response to the criticism.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a few days.
Well, this campaign doesn't get
any less exciting,
less interesting.
MARK SHIELDS: No, that's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
Jennifer Rubin,
thank you both.
Have a great weekend.
JENNIFER RUBIN: You, too.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: New research
has shown that bacteria makes
some women more
susceptible to contracting
HIV/AIDS.
But researchers think bacteria
could also
help protect women against the
virus.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Coming up tonight on "Washington
Week": With
just 81 days until the voters
head to the
polls, will Donald Trump's staff
shakeup help
get his campaign back on track?
And as the FBI hands Congress
information
about its investigation into
Hillary Clinton's
e-mails, will she be able to
maintain her
lead in the polls?
That's tonight on "Washington
Week."
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: Some gay
men were turned away from giving
blood after
the mass shooting at an Orlando
nightclub,
and now the Food and Drug
Administration is
reevaluating blood donation
restrictions that
some call discriminatory.
NARRATOR: The policy implemented
by the Food
and Drug Administration at the
start of the
AIDS epidemic requires gay and
bisexual men
like Sam to affirm they have
abstained from
sex with men for a whole year
before giving
blood.
MAN: I went to go try to give
blood and again
was told no.
You're being told, no, your
blood is not worthy.
QUESTION: Do you believe that
the FDA's policy
is discriminatory?
MD-BO /PETER MARKS, Food and
Drug Administration:
I don't believe it's
discriminatory, because
I believe it's not a policy
that's based on
a sexual orientation.
It's based on keeping the blood
supply safe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look at a group that runs
towards airstrikes
in order to save lives in Syria.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.